
--- PAGE 1 ---
CRANFIELD UNIVERSITY  
MSc in Computational & Software Techniques in Engineering  
APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTATIONAL ENGINEERING DESIGN OPTIMISATION 
(ESTIA)  
Group Project, 2025/2026  
Introduction  
I, Professor Chris Phillips, am the module leader for the 40-credit Group Project module that you will 
undertake as part of your MSc with Cranfield University.  I can be contacted by email - I do have a 
Cranfield email address, but please use chris.phillips@ncl.ac.uk . I can guarantee that I will answer 
anything sent to this address fairly promptly. You may also contact me via WhatsApp using 
+447879477519. However please see below for further details  of how to contact me.  
In this assignment  you are required  to work in groups , with  4 students  in each group  – so 5 groups in 
total . You are allowed to form your own groups, but the number of groups, and the number of 
students in each group, is fixed . You should establish a person who will be the Lead  Contact  for all 
groups/students throughout the project . The Lead Contact should identify themself to me at the 
earliest opportunity, and certainly while you are all visiting Cranfield University, and well before you 
return to Biarritz . The Lead Contact will need to ensure that the group constraints (number of groups, 
number of students in each group) are satisfied . 
Each group should have a Group Lead. Each group should also have a group name based on a theme. 
This year’s theme is Château in the Loire valley . The Lead Contact  should  inform me of the group 
compositions  (that is, who is in which group) , who the Group Leads are,  and what the names of the 
groups are , again, at the earliest opportunity .  
Any future contact with me (for example, to clarify any aspects of th is group project specification) 
should normally be through the Lead Contact. Should there arise a need for a n online catch -up session 
whereby I speak with all Group Leads  together this should be arranged through the Lead Contact. In 
addition to this, should any Group Lead  wish to contact me individually and directly they are free to 
do so, but this should only be in relation to a matter that they are unable /unwilling  to feed through 
the Le ad Contact . Similarly, should any individual wi sh to contact me directly they are again free to do 
so, but only in relation to a matter that they are unable /unwilling  to feed through their Group Lead.  
The aim of the assignment is to apply collective knowledge, in particular from the modules you have 
attended during your MSc studies in the area of design optimisation.  This module has three 
assessment components/Parts that must be passed individually and collectively. Assessment is 
entirely through coursework, there is no written examination. Time will be allocated for delivery of 
the module during the 2 weeks January 26th – February 6th when I will be visiting ESTIA. However , you 
are expected to work on t he project before, during, and after that period.  
This Group Project has two components, product and process, and both are important. The product 
is the solution of a technical problem based on the use of optimisation techniques, and will involve 
some software development . The process is concerned with how effectively the group works in 
achieving that product.  
--- PAGE 2 ---
The full details of the work to be completed will not be available at the outset. Instead details will be 
defined from time to time via an update to this document which I will email to the Lead Contact for 
distribution to the Group Leads, and from there to  all group members. Any times specified in this 
document are UK times.  
Although I will try to avoid doing so, I reserve the right to update this document in other ways from 
time to time, but only where I believe it to be in the interests of students, for example, to clarify what 
is required. If you spot any bugs/anomalies ple ase raise them through the Lead Contact and ask them 
to forward details to me as soon as possible.  
Meetings  
While this assignment aims at giving you the opportunity, freedom and responsibility to identify what 
your contributions might  be, a number of tasks are deemed to be standard across all groups.  
Task, and sub -task,  allocation to individual group members is decided by t he group members 
themselves and e very group member should track their time commitment to the pr oject starting from 
their receipt  of the assignme nt up until the  final  submission date. Each group  member is  required  to 
maintain a log  on a weekly basis, each week ending midnight Sunday . 
You are required  at the outset to identify the strengths and development opportunities of each group 
member. To assist you with this you will be provided with two documents, a Skills Matrix and a 
Strengths Ticklist. Each individual group member must  complete these documents, addressing the 
topics as frankly as possible, and then share these with the rest of the group. You are also required to 
undertake , and reflect on,  a free online personality test, such as Myers -Briggs , to determine your 
personality type . The real Myers -Briggs test costs money, but there are free examples that you can 
find on the web . These  analyses will help you with your review at the end of the module of how 
effectively you and the group worked while  completing the technical work.  
You are required  to take an Agile approach to tackling the technical work , with scrums, stand -ups, etc.  
You must  hold a meeting of all group members as soon as your group membership has been 
established, and no later than Friday November 14th 2025. At this meeting you are required to  discuss 
the Skills Matrix, Strengths Ticklist , and Myers -Briggs test results of all group members , and then 
allocate  initial  roles  to individuals appropriately. This is not to say that you may  not take on a role for 
which you have identified a relative weakness as there is an opportunity here to develop that skill. 
Further a  reallocation is possible at any stage in light of experience  and as  the group project develops.  
You must also identify appropriate free project management tools that you will employ whilst working 
on this project.  
Students are ex pected to be creative, identify their own contributions and carry out the technical and 
non-technical  work. This is an assignment where you  are encour aged to think 'out of the box'.  
Formal Submission requirements  
The formal (summative) assessment of the group a ssignment is based on the following marking 
scheme:  
• Part 1: 50% Group Coursework P ortfolio - a collection of document s describing the technical 
results (the product) that the group  has achieved by addressing  a number of technical Tasks 
(Tasks 2-4 and 6-7 to be identified below) which will be released via an updated version of this 
specification from time to time . Each Task will involve the production of a report which should 
be sent to me by the Group Lead  via email at a time/date specified in the Task. This email 
--- PAGE 3 ---
submission is intended primar ily so that I can monitor that you are making progress , although 
I will endeavour to give some feedback and an indicative /provisional  mark . All reports must  
subsequently be collated  as a single document, one per group, and submitted by the Group 
Lead  to Canvas by the deadline specified.  Only in exceptional circumstances should  any 
changes be made to the se document s between the  first time you send them  to me, and the 
final Canvas submission. Should you wish to make changes you will need my prior approval, 
which will not normally be given. Y ou will need to explain why you believe I should consider 
grant ing your request  
• Part 2: 3 0% Group Oral P resentation  – this is in two parts. There is an interim  in-person  oral 
presentation  (Task 5) at which you will present progress made so far. This is worth 10%. A 
second presentation  (Task 9) is worth 20%, and will be delivered  online  later in the academic 
year . Each presentation may be in a fairly standard format, but you are strongly encouraged 
to consider alternatives, such as PechaKucha, or perhaps a mixture. Attendance at the oral 
presentation s by all group members is compulsory.  The two presentations must be collated 
as a single document  and submitted by the Group Lead  to Canvas by the deadline specified 
below . 
• Part 3 : 20% - this is in two parts. Each group member should write two reflective self-
assessment s (Task 1 and Task 8), with Task 8 making extensive  reference  back to Task 1.  
• This is a group project , only one submission per group , by the Group Lead , is required  for each 
of Part s 1 and 2 . However, each group member is required to submit their own  Part 3 . 
The Tasks  
Task 1  (Individual Report)  – released by 20/10 /202 5: 
This Task requires each student to reflect on their skills and how these might be employed to support 
the group’s work.  
For each individual member of the group there must  be an analysis of the strengths/development 
opportunities of that group member and an initial proposal  of what role(s) they would like to  
undertake over the duration of the group project . Each group member must  include a discussion of 
their  personality test (Myers -Briggs or other), Skills Matrix, and Strengths Ticklist, and documents 
covering these should be attached as appendices.  
This Task is worth 5%  and contributes to Part 3 above . 
Individual reports should be collated by the Group Lead who will share them with all group members 
and then send them as a single document  by email to reach me by midnight 14/11/202 5. 
Task 2 (Group Report) – released by 20/10 /2025:  
This Task requires each group to consider how they might make use of the skills of each group member 
and plan, as much as possible, how the group project is to be tackled.  
As indicated above , you need to hold a first group meeting on or before November 13th 2025. At this 
meeting you should discuss the strengths and development opportunities of the group members as 
identified by all group members in Task 1. F rom that discussion you should propose an agreed initial 
allocation of roles and responsibilities of each  member . You must also identify the project 
management tools that you intend to use throughout the length of the group project. You must also 
identify a provisional tim eline in the form of a GANTT chart which you should refer to, and update, 
from time to time between the start of the group project and the end. A group report must be 
produced that  summarises these discussions.  
--- PAGE 4 ---
This Task is worth 5% and contributes to Part 1 above.  
This report should be sent by email to reach me by midnight 21/11/202 5. 
Task 3 (Group Repor t) – released  by 20/11 /202 5: 
This Task requires you to investigate further the unconstrained and constrained optimisation 
techniques that have been introduced as part of your Cranfield degree. It is likely to involve some 
coding, and will involve the production of a detailed report de scribing your findings.  
As part of your coursework for the Computational Optimisation Design module you studied at 
Cranfield you were required to minimise the Griewank Function by using  a stochastic scheme such as 
Simulated Annealing or Particle Swarm Optimisation. In th is and  following tasks you are required to 
investigate techniques of unconstrained and constrained nonlinear optimisation, but you can choose 
to write code from scratch, use code you have already written, or make use of publicly available source 
code. The credit you get will be the same, whichever approach you take, but you will, naturally, be 
expected to acknowledge the authorship of any code you make use of that is not your own. It is 
important that  you have full access to the source code , not ‘black box’ routines.  
Using both the Particle Swarm and the Simulated Annealing techniques , solve three optimisation 
problems ( covering both constrained and unconstrained) of your choice ( but NOT related to a cooling 
tower , and NOT one that you studied for your Computational Optimisation Design coursework ) and 
summarise your results. You are required to compare  the performance of these  methods. One way of 
measuring performance is to count the number of evaluations of the objective function  on the 
assumption that , for a suitably ‘complicated’ objective function,  each such evaluation is expensive in 
terms of time. Use this measure, and any other appropriate measures (e.g. elapsed time) , to compare 
performance. You must  include graphical representations of your results.  
In this, and subsequent, tasks, if you are employing a penalty function to ensure that constraints are 
met you should experiment with various multiplying constants to see what effect, if any, they have on 
ensuring that any constraints are satisfied.  
This Task is worth 10% and contributes to Part 1 above.  
This report should be sent by email to reach me by midnight 12/12 /2026.  
Task 4 (Group Report) – released by 11/12/2025:  
This Task is similar to Task 3 but involves the investigation of different optimisation techniques.  
This Task is worth 1 0% and contributes to Part 1 above . 
This report should be sent by email to r each me by midnight 23/01/202 6. 
Task 5 (Group Presentation) – released  by 23/01/202 6: 
This Task requires you to present a summary of your findings so far.  
The presentation part of this Task is worth 10% and contributes to Part 2 above.  
You do not need to send anything to me by email in response to this Task.  
Task 6 (Group Report) – released by 23/01/202 6: 
This Task requires you to apply the optimisation techniques employed in Task 3 and Task 4 to a 
specified optimisation problem.  
--- PAGE 5 ---
This Task is worth 2 0% and contributes to Part 1 above . 
This report should be sent by email to reach me by midnight 06/03 /202 6. 
Task 7 (Group Report) – released by 05/03 /2026:   
This Task will involve the use of ABAQUS.  
This Task is worth 5% and contributes to Part 1 above.  
This report should be sent by email to reach me by midnight 26/03/2026.  
Task 8 (Individual Report)  – released  by 25/03 /202 6:  
This Task will require each group member to reflect on their, and the group’s, performance over the 
past few months . Timesheets covering the time you have spent on the group project should be 
attached as appendices.  
This Task is worth 15% and contributes to Part 3 above . 
You do not need to send anything to me by email in response to this Task.  
Task 9 (Group Presentation) – released by 25/03 /2026: 
This Task requires you to give a presentation describing the work you have done on the group Project.  
This Task is worth 20% and contributes to Part 2 above.  
You do not need to send anything to me by email in response to this Task.  
Deadlines:  
For each group, the Group Lead  should submit 2 documents, one for each of Part 1  and Part 2 . Each 
group member should additionally submit  their  own Part 3 . The deadline for the submission of Parts 
1, 2 and 3 is 9:30 am UK time Friday  May  15th 2026. 
 
Chris Phillips  
Last updated 16/11 /202 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 